CPU Hotplug design proposal (#216)
kubevirt/community: design-proposals/cpu-hotplug.md

kubevirt/kubevirt

# Design
In VM objects, the existing CPU `sockets` field will now be dynamic, provided that it has been declared as such.
Declaring the field as dynamic will be done by adding a `cpu` entry to a new section under the VM spec, called `liveUpdateFeatures`.
Under the `cpu` entry, it will be possible to define a maximum number of sockets. That number is needed by LibVirt and will default to 4 times the initial number of sockets if not set.

Increasing the number of CPU sockets will not only add CPUs to the guest but also increase the CPU resources available to the virt-launcher pod, via a migration (more on that in the Implementation section).
The way LibVirt handles CPU hotplug is by exposing the maximum number of CPUs to the guest and turning off the unused CPUs. In this document, when we refer to "adding" CPUs to the guest, we're really just turning them on. This is why we need to define a maximum number of sockets in advance.

## Drawbacks / Limitations
- Since CPU hot-(un)plug involves a live migration, VMs will have to be `LiveMigratable` to enable CPU hotplug
- Each disabled vCPU, so `(maxSockets - sockets) * cores * thread`, consumes 8MiB of overhead memory

> - This feature will be incompatible with CPU requests/limits, at least initially, since those values need to dynamically scale according to the current number of enabled CPUs

Reviewer: Won't the target pod be created with the updated topology and hence increase the requested overhead?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- This feature makes CPU requests/limits second-class entries, as they would be automatically recalculated by KubeVirt based on the number of sockets.
```
+1 for a rephrase ^^^

Reviewer 3: @dankenigsberg You stated that as a user you want the CPU hotplug to happen automatically, w/o additional API fields like `liveUpdateFeatures`, but how will it fit with this drawback? and if the suggestion is to gate CPU hotplug in KV CR, what about multi-tenant envs?

Reviewer 2: Hmm. I did not think about this issue. I cannot imagine a user changing the number of cores but wanting it to take effect only in the far future. However I can image someone being surprised by by the request/limits suddenly recalculated.

I think that the way to solve this is to have KubeVirt recalculate the requests/limits of the virt-launcher pod and only if requests/limits were not specified. The VM spec is the input to KubeVirt, controlled by humans. It would be a violation of layering if KubeVirt is to edit its own spec.

I don't think that it is important to block hot-plug on the cluster level and certainly not on the tenant level. VM owners can decide to use it only when they need it. I think that `liveUpdateFeatures` introduces complexity that is not really needed by users; it is an expensive commitment that clutters the API and forces us to add many tests. If we believe that we must cater to users who do not want hot-plug, a cluster-wide feature gate would be less expensive.

## API Examples

### Spec API

```
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachine
metadata:
  labels:
    kubevirt.io/vm: vm-cirros
  name: vm-cirros
spec:
  running: false
  liveUpdateFeatures:
  - cpu

>       maximumSockets: 4

Reviewer 4: This approach is not intended to live-update VMI resources directly?
Thus to hotplug CPU you always have to have the above VM resource, am I right?

>       maximumSockets: 4

Author: > Is that list with maps? I think it's better to make map of maps

Right, this has to be a map of maps, will fix.

> However, personally I don't like to have parameters like maximumSockets outside of domain section

Since `maximumSockets` is an attribute of the CPU live update feature, and since it doesn't make sense when the feature is not enabled, I thought having is there made the most sense. We could move it to `domain` and ensure the live update feature is enabled in a webhook, but I'm not sure it adds any value...

> This approach is not intended to live-update VMI resources directly?
> Thus to hotplug CPU you always have to have the above VM resource, am I right?

Live updates features would indeed require VMs and not just VMIs. Technically, final users of KubeVirt should only ever work with VMs, VMIs being just intermediate objects that they should not be concerned with. In reality though, VMIs do appear to be quite popular!
That being said, having the `liveUpdateFeatures` and dynamic `sockets` in boths VMs and VMIs feels like a bit of a headache to reconcile...

  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        kubevirt.io/vm: vm-cirros
    spec:
      domain:
        cpu:
          sockets: 2
          cores: 4
          threads: 2
```
In this example, the user will be able to double the guest CPU resources by increasing the value of `sockets`.

### Status API

The VMI status must indicate the current and desired number of CPU sockets. These values need to be propagated back to the VM status to allows the user to have an indication of when their changes applied to the running VMI.

The user should be able to inspect the VM.Status values below to determine the state of their changes. This is similar in concept to someone inspecting a Deployments status to determine the desired number of pods vs the number of pods that are available.

```
// The declared number of sockets the vm is converging on
vmi.Status.Resources.Sockets.Desired
vm.Status.Resources.Sockets.Desired

// The number of sockets the vm has currently active.
vmi.Status.Resources.Sockets.Ready
vm.Status.Resources.Sockets.Ready

> ```

Author: I think that makes sense. @davidvossel WDYT?

- Ensure the guest sees the changed number of CPUs
- Ensure the CPU resources on the virt-launcher pod were adjusted accordingly

# Implementation Phases

The first two phases will happen together in the same pull request (PR), since the first phase is mostly useless without the second one.
In the unlikely case that hot-unplugging CPUs is more complicated than anticipated, hotplug-only could be submitted as a first PR, then hot-unplug later on as a second PR.
The third phase will happen later as a separate PR. It should be able to transparently replace the migration mechanism without API changes.

## Phase 1: Creating the KubeVirt API and linking it to the LibVirt CPU hotplug API
## Phase 2: Triggering a live migration when the number of sockets changes, to adjust the virt-launcher CPU resources

The VMI [workload update controller](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/ce8aab7874d2e1586787e3e2a17306b7edca1b8a/pkg/virt-controller/watch/workload-updater/workload-updater.go#L476) is extended to live migrate VMIs to satisfy updates to a VMI resource request/limits field.

Sequence of events:
- User updates CPU sockets on a vm.spec.template.spec.domain.cpu

> - VM controller determines the request/limits required and writes the necessary changes to the active vmi.Spec

Author: I probably need to rework this sentence. The idea is to disallow user specified CPU requests/limits when the CPU live update feature is enabled, because we do need to dynamically change the CPU request values. If we didn't do that, the virt-launcher pod won't get more CPU resources, and increasing the number of CPU sockets will have little to no effect...

- VMI workload update controller detects the mismatch between the resource request/limits on the pod vs vmi.Spec and live migrates the VMI to satisfy vmi.spec
- Migration controller constructs a new target pod with the desired CPU request/limits
- VMI live migrates
- virt-handler triggers the hotplug/hot-unplug LibVirt action after the live migration completes
- VM status is updated to reflect that the pending hotplug/hot-unplug actions have completed

> ## Phase 3 (future): Using the [KubeVirt vertical scaling API](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources ) once it reaches a more mature state

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Phase 3 (future): Using the [Kubernetes vertical scaling API](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources ) once it reaches a more mature state
```

Live vertical scaling of VM resources in general can be very useful in a variety of scenarios.

## Goals
- Hotplug and hot-unplug of CPU resources from VMs should be achievable by editing the VM object itself (no sub-resources)
- Underlying technology used for hotplug should be independent of the VM API, meaning we should be able to swap out how hotplug is technically performed in the future without impacting API compatibility
- Implementation should be achievable today, with Kubernetes APIs that are at least in beta. Unfortunately, at the time of writing, the Kubernetes vertical pod scaling API is only alpha

## Non Goals
- Revising existing hotplug mechanisms like Volume hotplug
- Dynamically applying affinity rules to VMIs

## Definition of Users
A user with (at a minimum) create, update, and patch access for VM objects within a namespace.

## User Stories
As a VM user, I would like to dynamically increase or decrease the number of CPUs used by a VM without requiring the VM to restart.

## Repos
kubevirt/kubevirt

# Design
In VM objects, the existing CPU `sockets` field will now be dynamic, provided that it has been declared as such.

> Declaring the field as dynamic will be done by adding a `cpu` entry to a new section under the VM spec, called `liveUpdateFeatures`.

Reviewer 5: For the network interface hotplug, I suggested to use the existing domain resources requests (or/and limits) with a dedicated resource name. The semantics of "requests" is for assuring reservation and "limits" for placing an upper limit.

Is there a reason not to re-use the "map" of resources for the same?

Reviewer: I see the map of `liveUpdateFeatures` to be inconsistent with ` resources requests`, in the future `liveUpdateFeatures` may contain not just resources thinks like nodeSelector, etc...

Reviewer 5: Well, I do not understand the grouping then.
Subject domains are distributed in the spec, but this one seems to try and group "live-update" and de facto duplicates other subject domains trees.

The parts which are about reservation or limitation of resources, can re-use the `Domain.Resources` structure. When the scope changes and requires a more complex coordination, new things could be created.

Are the existing resources discussed in this proposal not a fit for the domain resource semantics?
Is there an example of something that is not a fit? I want to understand better the `resources` limitation in this regard.

Reviewer: Normally, changes made to the VMI template will not take effect immediately, but only on a creation of a new VMI.
The new `vm.spec.liveUpdateFeatures` should tell which changes to the vmi template will propagate immediately.
Having this I'm mind, I don't see a clear connection to the resources struct.   

> Are the existing resources discussed in this proposal not a fit for the domain resource semantics?
> Is there an example of something that is not a fit? I want to understand better the resources limitation in this regard.

This is not part of this proposal, however, it was discussed to add something like `Affinity` will be added in the future to dynamically control the node affinity of the VMI. 
Additionally, the Memory struct which will be added in the future, could preallocate the hot-plugged memory, so it could have something like a `MaxQuantity` field in it.

I don't see a reason why we need to force the liveUpdateFeatures to use the resource struct.

Reviewer 5: > Normally, changes made to the VMI template will not take effect immediately, but only on a creation of a new VMI. The new `vm.spec.liveUpdateFeatures` should tell which changes to the vmi template will propagate immediately. Having this in mind, I don't see a clear connection to the resources struct.

Indeed, changes to the VM spec template are currently never passed on to the underlying VMI.
Storage hotplug have and not network hotplug are using a command queue to propagate such changes.

Is this proposal is suggesting a new way to propagate live changes?

> I don't see why we need to force the liveUpdateFeatures to use the resource struct.

That was not my intention.
The way storage & network hotplug are propagated from a VM to a VMI is through a queue on the VM status.
Users can only use the virt-api to update live changes, not directly on the VM. I.e. changes on the VM directly are never "live".

The usage of the resource generic structure is to pass in various key-value that represent resources of the domain, relevant for both immutable and mutable resources. The ones that are live updatable, are processed by the VMI, the others are left for the next boot. If there are existing fields for the resource in other places (e.g. disks, volumes, interfaces, cpu count), no need to add to the resource key/value anything.

> > Are the existing resources discussed in this proposal not a fit for the domain resource semantics?
> > Is there an example of something that is not a fit? I want to understand better the resources limitation in this regard.
> 
> This is not part of this proposal, however, it was discussed to add something like `Affinity`, which will be added in the future to control the node affinity of the VMI dynamically. Additionally, the Memory struct which will be added in the future, could preallocate the hot-plugged memory, so it could have something like a `MaxQuantity` field in it.
> 
> I don't see why we need to force the liveUpdateFeatures to use the resource struct.

Reviewer 6: I honestly like this proposal as is, the introduction of the `liveUpdateFeatures` field makes it straightforward to understand which resources are live updatable in a running VM.

To me, it just makes it easier to better understand and use the hotplug capabilities of the VM.

Reviewer 5: This suggestion is not straightforward to me, because it introduces two places for the same information to exist. At least, this is not a simple solution, considering that users just want to request changes to a running VM.
But the real interesting feedback is from the feature stakeholders, which should confirm if this fits their needs or not.

But my main concern is about not having a common consistent method to do live updates.
IMO this needs to be discussed in a cross SIG forum and once agreed upon on the API, to convert all to the same method.

Reviewer 7: >I honestly like this proposal as is, the introduction of the liveUpdateFeatures field makes it straightforward to understand which resources are live updatable in a running VM.

It seems that it does more than that, it enables setting an upper limit for CPU sockets inside the guest.
Per my understanding this can be achieved through `resource.limits` or `spec.domain.cpu`.

As for today you have two places to set the CPU resource, adding another place make the API more cumbersome and worse experience IMO.

> Declaring the field as dynamic will be done by adding a `cpu` entry to a new section under the VM spec, called `liveUpdateFeatures`.

Reviewer 8: Yes, that is exactly what I mean. I just find it better to be written down.

> Declaring the field as dynamic will be done by adding a `cpu` entry to a new section under the VM spec, called `liveUpdateFeatures`.

Reviewer: @enp0s3 could you please add this line?

> Under the `cpu` entry, it will be possible to define a maximum number of sockets. That number is needed by LibVirt and will default to 4 times the initial number of sockets if not set. That default value will be configurable in the KubeVirt CR.

Reviewer 8: Is this field mutable?

Reviewer: Everything in kubevirt CR is mutable, no?

Reviewer 8: I thought this refers mainly to `VM.spec.liveUpdateFeatures.cpu`. KV is of course mutable and I don't see a problem there.

Reviewer: Right, changing the number of maxCpus in the `liveUpdateFeatures.cpu` struct shouldn't have any effect on the running VMI. It should only propagate to the vmi spec on re-creation.

> On VM startup, that value will translate to a new `maxSockets` entry under `spec.domain.cpu` in the VMI object. However, all VMI CPU fields will stay immutable, and CPU sockets will only be adjustable on the VM object.

Reviewer 3: @vladikr @jean-edouard Hi. I have a concern about setting a default for `spec.liveUpdateFeatures.CPU` because assuming that memory hotplug will live here too, and the user wants to configure memory hotplug only, then we will set defaults for CPU, and then the VM update admitter will prevent the user from configuring the CPU resources, although the user wanted only memory hotplug. WDYT?

Author: `liveUpdateFeatures` is, at its core, the list of features that can be live-updated. If it's empty, then CPU/mem/other will **not** be live-updateable.
In the case of `cpu: {}`, CPUs are now live-updatable, and maxSockets gets set to its default value.
That's how I see it at least.

Reviewer: I'd prefer each feature to be explicitly listed. The list of supported features can change, but the VM spec may remain the same...

> Increasing the number of CPU sockets will not only add CPUs to the guest but also increase the CPU resources available to the virt-launcher pod, via a migration (more on that in the Implementation section).

Reviewer 8: Do we want to mention that the sockets will be identical? Meaning you can hot plug more cpus than one could think?

Reviewer: Do you mean that the total number of plugged vCPUs will be (number of changed sockets) * cores * threads?
I'm not sure I understand the question...

Reviewer 8: Yes, is my understanding correct?

Reviewer: Yes. That's correct. I guess that's what topology means. I'd prefer this to be explained in detail in the user guide.
Perhaps you can suggest a better sentence here?

Reviewer 8: Maybe it is enough to add "Today's approach, hotplugging sockets, semantically means that more than one vCPU can be added, by adding one socket, depending on the topology. This can be expressed by formula (number of changed sockets) * cores * threads "

- Each disabled vCPU, so `(maxSockets - sockets) * cores * thread`, consumes 8MiB of overhead memory
- This feature will be incompatible with CPU requests/limits, at least initially, since those values need to dynamically scale according to the current number of enabled CPUs

## API Examples

### VM Spec API

```
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachine
metadata:
  labels:
    kubevirt.io/vm: vm-cirros
  name: vm-cirros
spec:
  running: false
  liveUpdateFeatures:
    cpu
      maximumSockets: 4
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        kubevirt.io/vm: vm-cirros
    spec:
      domain:
        cpu:
          sockets: 2
          cores: 4
          threads: 2
```
In this example, the user will be able to double the guest CPU resources by increasing the value of `sockets`.

### VMI Spec API

The VM definition above would translate to the following VMI:

```
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
metadata:
  labels:
    special: vm-cirros
  name: vm-cirros
spec:
  domain:
    cpu:
      maxSockets: 4
      sockets: 2
      cores: 4
      threads: 2
```

### Status API

> The VMI status must indicate whether CPU hotplug is taking place. As the hotplug process begins the current state of `spec.domain.cpu` needs to be propagated back to the VM/VMI `status.currentCPUTopology` to allow the user to have an indication of the hotplug processing.

Reviewer 6: What about `status.pendingLiveUpdates.currentCPUTopology` ? I think it would be better to embed this in a `pendingLiveUpdates` struct so that we can plug other hotplug features status info in there. I'm mainly thinking about memory hotplug too.

Reviewer: @acardace , this is actually the current topology as the guest currently sees it, the `desired` state is reflected in the spec. The same pattern is used by ResourceQuota, for example - when the spec is changed the actual state of the quota is listed in the status and only changes then the controller actually start using the changes requested in the spec.

Reviewer 3: @acardace Hi! wrapping these statuses under common subject would introduce a technical debt, since after successful hotplug action we are removing the `currentCPUTopology`. Now assume we have it wrapped, we will have to take care about removing the wrapper as well. Perhaps its better to leave it flat to ease the maintenance, WDYT?

Reviewer 6: You guys are right, let's keep it like this.

During the hotplug process, the current CPU topology state will be reflected in VM/VMI `Status.currentCPUTopology` while the desired CPU topology state will be in `spec.Domain.CPU`. When the hotplug process completes the `Status.currentCPUTopology` will be cleared.

```
	// CPU allow specified the detailed CPU topology inside the vmi.
		CurrentCPUTopology *CPU `json:"currentCPUTopology,omitempty"`
```

Conditions on the VM and VMI should indicate the status of the pending CPU hotplug actions. When errors occur, the conditions should propagate the errors to the VM.Status.Conditions field so users can receive feedback into the status of their declared state.

```
	// Indicates that the VMI is in progress of Hot vCPU Plug/UnPlug

> 	VirtualMachineInstanceVCPUChange VirtualMachineInstanceConditionType = "HotVCPUChange"

Reviewer 8: I would suggest to be more specific, referring to plug or unplug.

Reviewer: Why would it matter? the main point is that the number of vCPUs in changing. Whether this is plug or unplug one could understand by looking at the vmi spec (desired state) and the currentCPUTopology (current state)

Reviewer 8: Fair enough

```

Upon succesful hotplug action the condition will be removed. Otherwise, a human readable reason and message indicating whether the hotplug change is pending or encountering errors.

## Extensibility
We will be able to use the new `liveUpdateFeatures` section to manage things like memory hotplug in the future.

## Update/Rollback Compatibility

> This is an entirely new feature, so updates from older versions will not be a problem.

Reviewer 8: What about VMs created in x-1 version? Are they able to leverage this feature?

Reviewer: Not without a re-creation of the VMI

Reviewer 8: I would write it down

> ## Functional Testing Approach

Reviewer 8: Are there plans to test following:
1. Unplug
2. Hot plug/unplug during hot plug/unplug
3. Interaction with max inflight migrations?
?

The third phase will happen later as a separate PR. It should be able to transparently replace the migration mechanism without API changes.

## Phase 1: Creating the KubeVirt API and linking it to the LibVirt CPU hotplug API
## Phase 2: Triggering a live migration when the number of sockets changes, to adjust the virt-launcher CPU resources

The VMI [workload update controller](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/ce8aab7874d2e1586787e3e2a17306b7edca1b8a/pkg/virt-controller/watch/workload-updater/workload-updater.go#L476) is extended to live migrate VMIs to satisfy updates to a VMI resource request/limits field.

Sequence of events:
- User updates CPU sockets on a vm.spec.template.spec.domain.cpu
- VM controller determines the request/limits required and writes the necessary changes to the active vmi.Spec
- VMI workload update controller detects the mismatch between the resource request/limits on the pod vs vmi.Spec and live migrates the VMI to satisfy vmi.spec
- Migration controller constructs a new target pod with the desired CPU request/limits
- VMI live migrates

> - virt-handler triggers the hotplug/hot-unplug LibVirt action after the live migration completes

Reviewer 8: I completely  miss an information which will be used by handler to determine that the migration happened.

Reviewer: Hmm.. this should take place in finalizeMigration() - this assumes that the migration is over.
Here virt-handler would check if vmi.Status.CurrentCPUTopology exists and will call `SyncVirtualMachineCPUs`

Reviewer: but this seems like an implementation detail to me.

Reviewer 8: I agree that it is implementation detail but at the same time one of which matters imho. Why? Well as you said in this case you would like to implement it in `finalizeMigration` but what about the version where we use in-place update? 

Also `SyncVirtualMachineCPUs` seems like new API and it is not documented. Why do we need it and why can't we do this in `SyncVMI` (existing) call?

Reviewer: > what about the version where we use in-place update?

such a version doesn't exist today. However, `SyncVirtualMachineCPUs` was introduced specifically to address the vCPU change which can happen with or without migration.
I honestly don't see how we can mix this functionality with a regular syncVMI flow. 
`SyncVirtualMachineCPUs` should happen at a specific time when we know that vCPUs can be manipulated. virt-handler should orchestrate this step and it shouldn't happen on ever syncVMI call.

Reviewer 8: >such a version doesn't exist today. However, SyncVirtualMachineCPUs was introduced specifically to address the vCPU change which can happen with or without migration.

From goals section "Underlying technology used for hotplug should be independent of the VM API, meaning we should be able to swap out how hotplug is technically performed in the future without impacting API compatibility"

I am trying to see if current approach/API is sufficient for seamless change of way we do this.

Therefore let me re-iterate once again. How do we signal the hotplug in case of different way of implementing this?

While writing this I also don't understand what is an expecting behavior in this case:
1. VM is being migrated or is going to be migrated
2. Users changes the number of sockets
3. Migration is completed

What happens in step 3? Will we explode?

Reviewer 8: @enp0s3 Consistency and it should be rather other way around. What is benefit of new API and not keeping it consistent?

Reviewer 8: @acardace 

>I agree with @vladikr on this, we need a new API to make this easier to work with when the vertical scaling API will land.

I am probably missing something. How is this making it easier? Also please document the API requirement here.

>SyncVMI is not a good place to put hotplug logic otherwise you will see continuous notification of a device being hotplugged in the guest, it's definitely better to hotplug when requested with a different code path.

Why would we have continuous notifications? Would simple `if` be sufficient?
`if hasDifferentCPU {
    do the magic and log, otherwise no notification
}`

>it's definitely better to hotplug when requested with a different code path.

What are the benefits?

Reviewer 6: > I am probably missing something. How is this making it easier? Also please document the API requirement here.

I mean internal API, between libvirt and kubevirt.

Requirement is it should hotplug CPUs :)

> 
> > SyncVMI is not a good place to put hotplug logic otherwise you will see continuous notification of a device being hotplugged in the guest, it's definitely better to hotplug when requested with a different code path.
> 
> Why would we have continuous notifications? Would simple `if` be sufficient? `if hasDifferentCPU { do the magic and log, otherwise no notification }`

Yes, of course, you can do it by adding fields in the vmi.Status or check what the current domain looks like, to check whether you already hotplugged CPUs or whether a hotplug is in progress but SyncVMI() creates a new api.Domain anew every time and I'd rather leave its functionality and semantics as is.

I think it's simpler and more maintainable/readable if we use another internal API to do live hotplug which is a one-time live operation.

> 
> > it's definitely better to hotplug when requested with a different code path.
> 
> What are the benefits?

For me simplicity.

Reviewer 6: > > such a version doesn't exist today. However, SyncVirtualMachineCPUs was introduced specifically to address the vCPU change which can happen with or without migration.
> 
> From goals section "Underlying technology used for hotplug should be independent of the VM API, meaning we should be able to swap out how hotplug is technically performed in the future without impacting API compatibility"
> 
> I am trying to see if current approach/API is sufficient for seamless change of way we do this.
> 
> Therefore let me re-iterate once again. How do we signal the hotplug in case of different way of implementing this?
> 
> While writing this I also don't understand what is an expecting behavior in this case:
> 
> 1. VM is being migrated or is going to be migrated
> 2. Users changes the number of sockets
> 3. Migration is completed
> 
> What happens in step 3? Will we explode?

After the VM has been migrated virt-controller will notice that the CPUTopology in the vmi.Status is different than the desired one and will hotplug I guess?

Reviewer 6: > > I mean internal API, between libvirt and kubevirt.
> 
> I don't understand the answer. We never strived to have 1:1 mapping to libvirt nor do I think it is easier.

I didn't say that.

> 
> > Yes, of course, you can do it by adding fields in the vmi.Status or check what the current domain looks like, to check whether you already hotplugged CPUs or whether a hotplug is in progress but SyncVMI() creates a new api.Domain anew every time and I'd rather leave its functionality and semantics as is.
> 
> I believe the semantics doesn't change.

I don't agree.

> 
> > I think it's simpler and more maintainable/readable if we use another internal API to do live hotplug which is a one-time live operation.
> 
> My experience is contradicting this. The less we expand this internal API the better as we reuse what we already have. Also now we are leaking logic which is responsible for what should happen to virt-handler. My perception is that we mostly kept this in virt-launcher.

I don't know maybe you're right about all of this, it's also hard to discuss this back and forth in GH like this, what's most important is that I think we're diverging from the objective, this is a design PR, not an implementation one.

What I mean is that I don't really mind where it lands (SyncVMI vs separate API) as long as the implementation is sound, but we should focus on the overall design here which I think it's outlined pretty clearly.

> 
> > After the VM has been migrated virt-controller will notice that the CPUTopology in the vmi.Status is different than the desired one and will hotplug I guess?
> 
> Sure but migrated Pod will have the same resources, meaning not adjusted to what was asked, and still I believe you want to trigger the hot un/plug. Leaving the domain updated but Pod is not. Or even worse making race behavior.

Then it's going to migrate again, but I'd stop here since I feel like we're going into a rabbit hole and these are implementation details anyway, the desired outcome is clear, hotplug has to happen if requested.

Reviewer: > > I mean internal API, between libvirt and kubevirt.
> 
> I don't understand the answer. We never strived to have 1:1 mapping to libvirt nor do I think it is easier.
> 
> > Yes, of course, you can do it by adding fields in the vmi.Status or check what the current domain looks like, to check whether you already hotplugged CPUs or whether a hotplug is in progress but SyncVMI() creates a new api.Domain anew every time and I'd rather leave its functionality and semantics as is.
> 
> I believe the semantics doesn't change.
> 
> > I think it's simpler and more maintainable/readable if we use another internal API to do live hotplug which is a one-time live operation.
> 
> My experience is contradicting this. The less we expand this internal API the better as we reuse what we already have. Also now we are leaking logic which is responsible for what should happen to virt-handler. My perception is that we mostly kept this in virt-launcher.
> 
> > After the VM has been migrated virt-controller will notice that the CPUTopology in the vmi.Status is different than the desired one and will hotplug I guess?
> 
> Sure but migrated Pod will have the same resources, meaning not adjusted to what was asked, and still I believe you want to trigger the hot un/plug. Leaving the domain updated but Pod is not. Or even worse making race behavior.

@xpivarc It will not. The target pod will have adjusted resources. 
When we create the target pod, it is being created from a template that uses the updated the vmi spec, thus it will correctly calculate and update the requested resources.

      maximumSockets: 4
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        kubevirt.io/vm: vm-cirros
    spec:
      domain:
        cpu:
          sockets: 2
          cores: 4
          threads: 2
```
In this example, the user will be able to double the guest CPU resources by increasing the value of `sockets`.

### VMI Spec API

The VM definition above would translate to the following VMI:

```
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
metadata:
  labels:
    special: vm-cirros
  name: vm-cirros
spec:
  domain:
    cpu:
      maxSockets: 4
      sockets: 2
      cores: 4
      threads: 2
```

### Status API

The VMI status must indicate the current number of CPU sockets. The value needs to be propagated back to the VM status to allows the user to have an indication of when their changes applied to the running VMI.

The user should be able to inspect the VM.Status value below to determine the state of their changes. This is similar in concept to someone inspecting a Deployments status to determine the the number of pods that are available.

```
// The number of sockets the vm has currently active.
vmi.Status.Resources.Sockets.Ready
vm.Status.Resources.Sockets.Ready

> ```

Reviewer: Would it make sense to simply keep the `CurrentCPUTopology` as a whole in the status? I know that only sockets change, but that would show the actual current topology and no one would be confused.
I just had something like that in mind: ```vmiCopy.Status.CurrentCPUTopology = vmi.Spec.Domain.CPU```

Conditions on the VM and VMI should indicate the status of the pending CPU hotplug actions. When errors occur, the conditions should propagate the errors to the VM.Status.Conditions field so users can receive feedback into the status of their declared state.

```
// VirtualMachineCPUReady indicates that the desired amount of cpu is active on the vmi
VirtualMachineCPUReady VirtualMachineConditionType = "CPUReady"
```

> When the desired state is equal to the ready state, then these conditions will have `Status=True`, otherwise `Status=False` with a human readable reason and message indicating whether the hotplug change is pending or encountering errors.

Reviewer: I would expect the condition to be present during the whole period of the hot plug/unplug and would it would be deleted when the operation is done.

This would also serve as an indication to the controller that the CPU change operation is ongoing (and there is no need to create a new migration). As in https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/9401/files#diff-05d3e75077f11cdd56ce409e1e87c9abcdd09fe103540cb25f920d0db319cdd0R212

What do you think?
